Mp7 blog (#4162)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-12-22-microprofile-7.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: "MicroProfile 7.0 Deep Dive with Open Liberty"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "MicroProfile 7.0 deep dive with Open Liberty"
```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/Emily-Jiang
author_github: https://github.com/Emily-Jiang

> seo-title: TITLE - MicroProfile 7.0 with Open Liberty - OpenLiberty.io

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-title: \MicroProfile 7.0 with Open Liberty - OpenLiberty.io
```

seo-description: An introduction to MicroProfile 7.0 
blog_description: Everything you need to know about MicroProfile 7.0
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---

> = TITLE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= MicroProfile 7.0 deep dive with Open Liberty
```

Emily Jiang <https://github.com/Emily-Jiang>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

> link:https://microprofile.io/compatible/7-0/[MicroProfile 7.0] was released in August 2024. It was a major release and contained the following significant changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MicroProfile provides a set of APIs and tools for developing, deploying, and managing microservices in a lightweight and efficient manner. Open Liberty 24.0.0.12 adds support for the MicroProfile 7.0.

link:https://microprofile.io/compatible/7-0/[MicroProfile 7.0] was released in August 2024. It is a major release and contains the following significant changes.
```

* MicroProfile 7.0 no longer packages a particular version of Jakarta EE Core Profile. Instead, it declares the minimum version of Jakarta EE, Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile.

> * MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 has backward incompatible changes and also brings in Logs and Metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0  brings in logs and metrics and also includes changes that are incompatible with earlier versions.
```

> * MicroProfile Metrics is no longer in MicroProfile 7.0, as the metrics capability is supplied by MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* MicroProfile Metrics is not part of MicroProfile 7.0, as the metrics capability is supplied by MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0.
```

* MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0 has a major release as it aligned with Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1.
* MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0 aligns with OpenAPI 3.1.

> * MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.1 has minor changes to integrate with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.1 integrates with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0.
```

The MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0 (implemented by the Liberty feature `mpRestClient-4.0`) aligns with Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1 as part of the greater effort to align MicroProfile 7.0 with Jakarta EE 10. It also adds the following updates.

* Added a new `RestClientBuilder.header(String, Object)` method to add dynamic headers to the request.
* Added a new `RestClientBuilder.baseUri(String)` overload method so users don't have to call `URI.create(String)`.
* Added clarification in the spec on how to use Jakarta RESTful Web Services `EntityPart` API for multipart requests.

=== Learn more

For more information, see the following resources:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-rest-client[Rest Client for MicroProfile] on GitHub
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-rest-client-4.0/microprofile-rest-client-spec-4.0.html[Rest Client for MicroProfile 4.0 specification document]
* link:http://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-rest-client-4.0/apidocs/[API Javadoc]

[#SUB_TAG_1]

> == MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 (Logs, Metrics and Tracing)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 (logs, metrics and tracing)
```

> The link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/mpTelemetry-2.0.html[MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0] (implemented by the Liberty feature `mpTelemetry-2.0`) helps improve the observability of your Java applications by using OpenTelemetry to collect and export logs, metrics, and traces in a standardized way. Previous versions (1.0, 1.1) of MicroProfile Telemetry could manage only distributed tracing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/mpTelemetry-2.0.html[MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0] (implemented by the  `mpTelemetry-2.0` Liberty feature) helps improve the observability of your Java applications by using OpenTelemetry to collect and export logs, metrics, and traces in a standardized way. Previous versions (1.0, 1.1) of MicroProfile Telemetry could manage only distributed tracing.
```

[#metrics]
=== Send Liberty metrics to OpenTelemetry

When the MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 feature (`mpTelemetry-2.0`) is enabled, Open Liberty can now forward runtime component statistics that are captured by the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/monitor-1.0.html[Performance Monitoring 1.0] feature (`monitor-1.0`) to the MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 runtime. This statistical data is registered as metrics in the telemetry runtime and can be forwarded to any OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) compatible metric consumer to meet your monitoring needs.

The following runtime components are supported:

* `ThreadPool`
* `Sessions`
* `RequestTiming`
* `ConnectionPool`

To collect and export metrics, enable OpenTelemetry by using the following system property or environment variable:

* System property: `otel.sdk.disabled=false`
* Environment variable: `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false`

You can set configuration properties in any of the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/external-configuration.html#default[config sources that are available to MicroProfile Config].

[#manualMetrics]
=== Use the OpenTelemetry API to mannually create metrics

> You can use the OpenTelemetry metrics API to define custom metrics in your application code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the supported runtime metric components, you can also use the OpenTelemetry metrics API to define custom metrics in your application code.
```

Before instrumenting your code, the following prerequisite is required:

> * Third-party APIs must be made visible for your application in the 

Reviewer: do you also need to Add the opentelemetry API and OpenTelemetry instrumentation annotations as a provided dependency to your build path? eg https://docs-draft-openlibertyio.mqj6zf7jocq.us-south.codeengine.appdomain.cloud/docs/latest/reference/feature/mpTelemetry-2.0.html#dev

Author: no

* System property: `otel.logs.exporter`
* Environment variable: `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER`

For more information about the available configuration properties, see xref:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/microprofile-config-properties.html#telemetry[MicroProfile Config properties: MicroProfile Telemetry].

=== Config OpenTelemetry Backend

The link:https://grafana.com/blog/2024/03/13/an-opentelemetry-backend-in-a-docker-image-introducing-grafana/otel-lgtm/[grafana/otel-lgtm] is a useful OpenTelemetry backend. You can set up the docker image via the following commands.

[source,console]
----
git clone https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm.git \
cd docker-otel-lgtm/docker
podman build . -t grafana/otel-lgtm \
podman run -p 3000:3000 -p 4317:4317 -p 4318:4318 --rm -ti localhost/grafana/otel-lgtm
----

The dashboard `localhost:3000` will list the logs, metrics and traces. For more information regarding the Grafana OTEL backend, see link:https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm[docker-otel-lgtm].

> For more information about using MicroProfile Telemetry to manage your metrics, logs, and traces in a standardized way, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/microprofile-telemetry.html[Enable observability with MicroProfile Telemetry].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about using MicroProfile Telemetry to manage your metrics, logs, and traces in a standardized way, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/microprofile-telemetry.html[Collect logs, metrics, and traces with OpenTelemetry].
```

[#SUB_TAG_2]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0

link:https://www.openapis.org/[OpenAPI] is a standardised way of documenting REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications built using JAX-RS or Jakarta Restful Web Services. This can be useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

The new MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0 feature (`mpOpenAPI-4.0`) brings support for the latest version of the specification with the following changes:

> 

Reviewer: nesting is not formatting correctly, suggesting a fix

> - Documentation is now produced in link:https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.0.html[OpenAPI 3.1 format] by default (updated from 3.0 in previous versions). Changes in OpenAPI 3.1 include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Documentation is now produced in link:https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.0.html[OpenAPI 3.1 format] by default (updated from 3.0 in previous versions). Changes in OpenAPI 3.1 include:
```

>   - Use of full JSON Schema 2020-12 draft for data object schemas (updated from a subset of an older JSON schema draft in 3.0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ** Use of full JSON Schema 2020-12 draft for data object schemas (updated from a subset of an older JSON schema draft in 3.0)
```

>   - Support for documenting webhooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ** Support for documenting webhooks
```

>   - Reusable PathItem objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ** Reusable PathItem objects
```

> - updates to the model API so that it directly reflects the OpenAPI 3.1 format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* updates to the model API so that it directly reflects the OpenAPI 3.1 format
```

> - additions to the annotations API to allow users to take advantage of the new features of OpenAPI 3.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* additions to the annotations API to allow users to take advantage of the new features of OpenAPI 3.1
```

A detailed list of changes can be found in the link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-4.0.2/microprofile-openapi-spec-4.0.2.html#release_notes_40[release notes of the specification].

> Although the OpenAPI 3.1 format is now the default, in Open Liberty, you can still configure `mpOpenAPI-4.0` to output in OpenAPI 3.0 format by configuring `openAPIVersion` in server.xml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the OpenAPI 3.1 format is now the default,  you can still configure `mpOpenAPI-4.0` to output in OpenAPI 3.0 format by configuring  the`openAPIVersion` attribute in your `server.xml` file:
```

[source.xml]
----
<mpOpenAPI openAPIVersion="3.0" />
----

> Additionally, this release will include all deployed applications in the OpenAPI documentation by default. If you need more control over which applications are documented, there's new server.xml configuration to include or exclude specific applications and modules and to specify the `info` section of the OpenAPI document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release also includes all deployed applications and modules in the OpenAPI documentation by default. If you need more control over which applications and modules are documented, there's new `server.xml` configuration to include or exclude specific applications and modules and to specify the `info` section of the OpenAPI document.
```

[source.xml]
----
<mpOpenAPI>
    <excludeApplication>HiddenApplication</excludeApplication>
    <excludeModule>myApp/adminModule</excludeModule>
    <info version="1.5"
          title="Foo API" />
</mpOpenAPI>
----

> More information on these options is available in the [reference documentation][config-doc].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/mpOpenAPI-4.0.html[MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0] and link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html#multi-module[Multiple application and multi-module application support with MicroProfile OpenAPI].
```

If you use MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.1 with MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 as well as MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0, it will export metrics to both MicroProfile Metrics and MicroProfile Telemetry. For more information, refer to link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1.1/microprofile-fault-tolerance-spec-4.1.1.html#_integration_with_microprofile_metrics_and_microprofile_telemetry[Integration with MicroProfile Metrics and MicroProfile Telemetry].

=== server.xml file configuration

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpFaultTolerance-4.1</feature>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

=== bootstrap.properties file configuration

The following example configures OpenTelemetry to only output metrics to the `messages.log` file.

> It also sets a very low interval for exporting metrics so you can see the results quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also sets a very low interval for exporting metrics so you can see the results quickly. You can use this configuration to easily demo how OpenTelemetry collects and exports you Fault Tolerance metrics.
```
